---
layout: post
title: "NL-RSE 2019 - Call for contributions"
---

Following the meetup in 2018, and the growing number of RSE events in the UK and Germany, NL-RSE is organizing the first full day event this year: NL-RSE 2019! The conference will take place on the 20th of November, at the Johan Cruijff ArenA, Amsterdam.

NL-RSE 19 is co-located with the [National eScience Symposium 2019](https://www.esciencecenter.nl/news/6th-national-escience-symposium-2019-digital-challenges-in-open-science) taking place the following day, and we greatly appreciate the [Netherlands eScience Center](https://www.esciencecenter.nl/) for sponsoring the venue.

We hope to provide an inspiring program, and welcome talks, posters, and workshops on both technical and other topics related to Research Software Engineers. We very much welcome first time presenters.

## Timeline
- 20 September 2019 - Deadline for submissions
- 18 October 2019 - Notification of acceptance and program
- 20 November 2019 - NL-RSE19 conference

## Who should submit?

We welcome submissions from anyone involved or related to research software, including:
- Researchers who develop software for research purposes
- Software developers working in a research context
- People from any organisation providing services to facilitate research software: tools makers, infrastructure providers, computing services, data centers, etc.
- Anyone with a stake in research software (funders, publishers, decision makers, etc).

## Practicalities
Please note that all contributions should be in English. The entrance fee for NL-RSE will be EUR 25, with requests for a waiver of this fee possible.

## Talks
Talks may have a length of 20 mins, including 5 mins for Q&A and discussion, depending on the number of talks in the respective session. If your talk is accepted, you will be notified about the length of the talk by the session chair.

## Workshops
Workshops are interactive sessions that give attendees the chance to collaborate on a specific topic. They may take different forms, e.g., as hands-on tutorial, discussion and speed-blogging session, hack session, etc. Workshops run over a length of up to 90 minutes.

## Posters
Posters will be displayed during the Posters & Drinks session. Each poster will also have the chance to pitch their poster during the plenary session, to attract people to visit your poster.

## Submission
To submit your contribution, fill in the [submission form](https://forms.gle/FwR7hhpGkEBcqtQ98).

## Contact
If you have any questions, please contact us at conference@nl-rse.org

